---
layout: post
title:  "New Phone?"
date:   2023-04-27 12:37:44 +0200
tags: [smartphone]
---

I am currently using a [Galaxy M20 with (now) unofficial LineageOS](https://alexcoder04.github.io/2022/10/24/lineageos-on-samsung-m20.html),
which will turn 4 years old this year.

Generally, I am not a kind of person who buys new products every one or two years,
and I love tools that last years and years, so I keep using them even if I'm facing
slight inconveniences.

However, the smartphone situation is different and here is why:

 - The situation with security and feature updates on Android phones is
   terrible. My phone was only supported for a couple of years and I was only
   receiving updates very unfrequently.
 - Furthermore, the Samsung variant of Android is a dumpster fire. It is ugly
   (my opinion), overloaded with bloated Samsung replacements for existing
   Android apps (40MB calculator, seriously?) and contains uninstallable
   bloatware like Microsoft products or Netflix.
 - I've had no problem using, I even would prefer flashing LineageOS on the
   phone (what I'm doing now), but as Samsung doesn't provide updated kernels
   and upstreaming the kernel on one's own is a pain in the \*ss, the device
   isn't even supported by LineageOS, so I have to rely on third-party
   unofficial builds as I don't have the hardware to build a ROM myself.
   Although [Samar-V-121](https://samarv121.wtf/) is doing an amazing job there,
   I would rather prefer using an officially supported OS.
 - And here are the reasons why:
   - No Push Notifications: it's a hassle to set up Google Play Services or
     microg myself, and it's still a kinda hacky solution
   - Camera bad: photo quality is worse than on the official ROM and the
     wide-angle camera doesn't work at all
 - So I end up with a perfectly working smartphone (it runs pretty smoothly
   because I don't do any intensive tasks as gaming), but I'm still not able to
   utilize all of its capabilities and have an enjoyable experience.

## Looking for a replacement

So I'm looking for a new phone unless I find some other solution. My current
plan is to wait until the end of the year, gather some more information and buy
a new phone after Christmas.

These are the requirements I have, from most important to least important:

1. Longevity and Security. By that I mean software support for at least 4-5 years.
2. No bloat. A clean and usable OS, no preinstalled bloatware. Never going back to Samsung.
3. Smooth experience. I love tinkering with Linux on my PC, but my phone has to
   just work. I want push notifications, easy way to install any apps without
   jumping over extra hoops.
4. Privacy. I know that it's very difficult to achieve on the mobile market
   nowadays, but I would like to avoid Big Tech companies that harvest my data
   and have as much Open Source as possible instead.
5. Price. I'm not going to pay $1000 for a phone.
6. Battery life. Just want my phone to last longer when I'm travelling and not
   having to carry a powerbank with me all the time.
7. Decent camera. Shooting beautiful photos would be a really nice addition.

I already considered some phones but they all fall through some of the
categories:

 - Samsung: No. Doesn't meet any of the requirements, maybe apart from camera
   and battery (?).
 - Any other 9-to-5 Android phone: already first two points aren't fulfilled.
 - Shiftphone: suggested by a friend, looks ok, but I don't know anything about
   them and cannot be sure that they will be bankrupt next year, so I'll lose
   any kind of software support.
 - Google Pixel: point 1, 2 and 3 are fulfilled. Privacy, price and battery life
   are not :(
 - Pinephone: Linux phone, yeah! If it would work properly...
 - No phone at all: life-time software support guaranteed, very cheap, and the OS is
   exceptionally clean, private and has unlimited battery life. However, the
   user experience is kinda lacking :(
 - The evil: I even looked at the brand I thought I wouldn't even consider:
   Apple. The same as with Google Pixel, 1-3 are fulfilled, but the privacy
   and especially the price... I don't know whether I can justify it.

That's why I would ask you for suggestions (if anyone is reading this at all):
what phone would you recommend? Looking forward for [emails](mailto:alexcoder04@protonmail.com?subject=Phone suggestion)
and messages on [Mastodon](https://techhub.social/@alexcoder04)!

