---
layout: post
title:  "How to stop procrastinating and start being productive"
date:   2023-11-19 17:52:44 +0200
tags: [productivity]
---

Hello everyone,

today, I want to share my method for being productive with you. I only
established it this week, so I don't know how well it works long-term yet but it
helped me to study for my exams very well so far.

It consists of three techniques, which can be summarized as "plan", "execute"
and "don't distract". This combination should stop you from procrastination and
make you sit down and do your work.

## Plan: Divide-And-Conquer Strategy

One major reason why we procrastinate is that our tasks are unconcrete and
therefore feel big and complicated. That's why we are postponing them for
"later", when  we will "have enough motivation and time". So, the natural
solution for that is to make the tasks feel easily achievable by dividing them
into smaller sub-tasks.

Here is an example: you need to write an essay in a week. There are two possible
ways in which you can say it to yourself:

1. *I start working on my essay on Monday.*

See how inconcrete this is? If you say it this way, you imply that you first
will have to sit down and plan what exactly you are going to write on Monday.
Furthermore, it is not possible to write the entire essay in one day and, as you
didn't specify what exactly and for how long you want to write, it seems like
your entire Monday will be dedicated to writing an essay which feels
overwhelming.

2. *I will write the introduction for my essay on Monday.*

This feels much more like a task you will be willing to do, doesn't it? You know
exactly what you are going to do and this is a manageable amount of work which you
know you will complete in an hour at most. You know that you have to plan in
only one hour for the essay and the rest of the day is free to so whatever you
like.

## Execute: 3R-Principle

However, only planning what you are going to so on a certain day is not enough.
A problem I struggled a lot with, is the "just five more minutes mood". I would
have a pretty precise plan for what I want to so on a certain day, however, as I
come home from school, I would constantly say to myself, "I'll watch one more
video and then do my homework" (spoiler: I'll discover a new interesting video I
want to watch after that), "I'll go for a walk to motivate myself for the essay"
(spoiler: I'll take a route way too long and be even more tired after that)
and so on.

My plan for the day was set but I could not find the motivation to execute it.
This is where the second principle comes in:

 - **R**oute
 - **R**emider
 - **R**eward

The first step is to plan a route on how you will drive through your day. You
can use paper or your phone's calendar for that, it's only important that you
fill in every hour of the day (I make a screenshot of the calendar on my iPad
and draw into that, don't judge me).

The second thing is to constantly remind yourself of your route. Hereby, it is
both important to limit the time you spend chilling but also the time you work.
If you work too much on one thing, you will not have enough time to do the other
things. This is why chunking your work into small managable pieces is so
important. I personally use a 2:1 cycle, 1 hour of work followed by a 30 minutes
pause, but that ratio can be adjusted for personal preference. I didn't
experiment with different cycles yet, but I would assume that you shouldn't work
for more than one hour without a break and that your breaks should be at least
15 minutes long. You can use alarms or reminders for that, but I use timers
instead myself: whenever I start working, I set a timer for 1h, and when I start
a break, I set a timer for 30min. The time ticking on my screen creates
additional awareness and pressure for me.

The final element of this strategy is reward: without it, it feels like you
alternate enjoyable and not enjoyable periods of time. You just want your work
time to pass so you can enjoy the break. To avoid this and boost your
motivation, make your work also enjoyable and comfortable. My personal methods
for this are ventillating the room before work so I get fresh air, adjusting my
chair and desk into a comfortable position and listening to music. When it comes
to music, I listen to the Lo-Fi playlist specifically, not because I believe
that it boosts productivity, but because I'm already used to put myself in the
working attitude when I hear that music.

## Don't distract: Use Technology

It seems like technology is you biggest enemy when it comes to productivity: all
the distracting notifications and addictive social media apps are one big
conspiracy that wants to keep you from working. However, if you learn to use
technology wisely, it will turn from an enemy into a friend.

I already discussed the role of calendars, reminders and timers in the previous
techniques. The last important step to tame technology is to eliminate
distractions, which is not as difficult as you might think with the tools we
have nowadays.

The first step is just to turn on the "do not disturb"-mode on your device, it's
as simple as that. I advise against just putting the phone on silent and prefer
"do not disturb", because it doesn't show your notifications completely. The other
important tool to make use of are app timers/limits which remind you to take a
break if you get soaked into scrolling through social media. There are also a
lot of other little adjustments you can make, like setting your screen into
grayscale mode to make using your phone less appealing, especially before going
to sleep, but I won't cover that in detail here.

## Conclusion

Staying productive is not difficult if you use some tricks, but it is a very
individual thing. I am happy to share my ideas with you and hope that they'll
help. If you found a mistake or want to add or ask me something, feel free to
contact me at [alex@alexcoder04.de](mailto:alex@alexcoder04.de).

## Reading recomendations

Although my method is original, it is loosely based on ideas of other's I read
about. In this context, I particularly recommend
<a href="https://jamesclear.com/articles" target="_blank">jamesclear.com</a> and
<a href="https://www.sahilbloom.com/articles" target="_blank">sahilbloom.com</a>.

